Pixel Challenge DMX Visualizer
Final v1 Design and Integration Specification
1. Purpose

The DMX Visualizer is the replacement for the current overgrown DMX editor workflow. Its purpose is to provide a simple, touch-friendly, game-aware visual configuration tool that lets the operator assign reusable lighting effects to a small set of named gameplay elements, then direct those effects to either all fixtures, selected fixtures, or predefined target groups.

The Visualizer is intentionally narrower in scope than the current editor. It is not trying to be a full scene authoring lab, a fixture profile editor, a show sequencer, and a trigger rules engine all at once. Its job is much simpler:

pick a game
load a profile for that game
choose a gameplay element
browse effects visually
assign the selected effect to one or more targets
save the profile

That is the core of the system.

The design goal is KISS: keep the interface large, clear, predictable, and easy to use on a touchscreen, while still leaving room for fixture growth and more advanced lighting layouts later.

2. Visualizer screen overview

The final visualizer uses a true 50/50 split:

left half = configuration and profile editing
right half = layout preview and live stage visualization

This even split is important. The left side is the brains. The right side is the visual confirmation. Neither side dominates the other.

Left pane title

CONFIGURATION

Right pane title

LAYOUT PREVIEW

The right side contains no configuration buttons in the final design. It is purely for the visual layout, fixture interaction, and live effect preview.

3. Left pane structure

The left pane is arranged in a logical top-to-bottom workflow.

3.1 Game

At the top of the configuration pane is the Game dropdown.

This dropdown lists all games currently available in the game library. In the current console, that list can already be provided by the host, since open_dmx_editor() passes game_list=self.games.list_names() and current_game=self.selected_game.get() into the editor. That means the host already knows the active game list and the currently selected game, which is exactly what the visualizer needs.

The selected game determines which saved profiles are relevant and which visual element assignments are being edited.

This should remain a normal dropdown because:

the number of games is manageable
the user is already familiar with selecting games this way in the console
the host already maintains current game selection
3.2 Profile row

Directly beneath the Game selector is the Profile row.

This row has two functions:

show the currently open profile name
provide access to the Targets manager

In the final layout, the profile row contains:

a Profile label
a field showing the currently loaded profile name
a Targets button on the same line

This is a strong design choice because it keeps profile context visible at all times and keeps the Targets tool nearby without wasting vertical space.

Profile meaning

A profile is a saved lighting configuration for a specific game.

A profile stores:

which effect is assigned to each element
which target each assignment applies to
optionally, which fixture layout or target definitions were used when that profile was created

A profile is not just one effect. It is the complete saved mapping for that game’s visual behavior.

Example profile names:

Default Small Rig
Blue Wash Setup
Church Wall Wash
Fast Action Layout
Kids Event Profile

This allows one game to have multiple lighting setups without changing code.

Profile visibility behavior

If a profile is open, its name must be visible in this row at all times.

That is important because the operator must always know:

what game is selected
which profile is currently being edited

If no profile is open yet, the row can display an “Open Profile” state or placeholder. Once loaded, the profile name replaces that placeholder.

3.3 Targets button

The Targets button opens the target definition manager.

Targets are defined before they can be used in the Apply To control.

This was an important design decision because it prevents:

invalid target references
“custom” selections that only exist temporarily
confusion about whether a target is saved or not

A target may represent:

one individual fixture
a named group of fixtures

Examples:

F1
F2
Left Wash Group
Right Wash Group
Top Fixtures
All Fixtures

The visualizer should not require the user to rebuild these every time. Targets are reusable definitions.

Target rule

A target can only be created if at least one fixture already exists on the right-side layout canvas.

So the dependency order is:

fixture exists in layout → target can be defined → target becomes available in Apply To

That rule keeps the system grounded in the actual stage layout.

3.4 Element column

The next section is the Element list.

This is one of the two main scrolling columns in the left pane.

It must have:

a visible section label: Element
a wide touchscreen-friendly vertical scrollbar

The element list contains the visual event buckets that a game can use.

The final agreed element list is:

Gameplay
Bonus
Danger
Special
Randomizer
Overlay 1
Overlay 2
Overlay 3
Overlay 4

These elements are intentionally broad. They are not meant to mirror every tiny gameplay event. They are the stable visual buckets that all games can share.

Element meanings
Gameplay

The normal active game state. This is the default in-play look.

Bonus

A positive event or reward moment. This may be brief or emphasized.

Danger

A warning or high-tension state, such as final seconds, critical condition, or failure risk.

Special

A major alternate mode, special round, boss phase, frenzy, or similar standout sequence.

Randomizer

A wildcard or special-purpose state for gameplay sections where a more chaotic or rotating visual style is wanted.

Overlay 1–4

Independent auxiliary outputs that may run on top of the main state without replacing it.

These were introduced specifically because your setup includes a 4-port dimmer pack with:

a beacon
three dimmable dumb lights

Those overlays are not the same thing as the main visual state. They are stackable auxiliaries.

3.5 Effect column

Next to the Element list is the Effect list.

This is the second main scrolling column in the left pane.

It must have:

its own explicit label: Effect
a wide touchscreen-friendly scrollbar
a highlighted selected item background, matching the same light-blue visual emphasis used in the Element column

This list is expected to grow large, so it should not be a tiny dropdown. It should function as a proper browsing list.

Effect meaning

An effect is a reusable visual behavior or look.

Examples:

Slow Blue Sweep
Slow Green Fade
Fast Red Wipe
White Strobe
Rainbow Collider
Warm Pulse
Orange Flash
Color Chase
Purple Shimmer
Red Glitter

The effect list is essentially the visualizer’s preset library.

Hover-preview behavior

One of the key behaviors of the final design is that effects are previewed by hover.

Once the user has selected:

a Game
an Element

then moving the mouse over the Effect list should temporarily animate the preview on the right side in real time.

The important behavior is:

while the pointer is over an effect, the preview is live
the fixtures animate to show what that effect looks like
this preview does not save anything by itself

This removes the need for a Preview button.

The hover-preview is deliberate because it allows rapid visual browsing without extra taps.

Selection behavior

Hover previews. Click selects.

Once the user finds an effect they want, they can click it to make it the current chosen effect for assignment.

That chosen effect is then paired with the current Apply To target.

3.6 Apply To

Near the bottom of the configuration pane is Apply To.

This is the target selector for the current assignment.

Because of its vertical position in the UI, it should not behave as a normal downward dropdown. It should behave as a drop-up or popup selector so the options open upward into available space.

That is the correct choice for this layout.

Apply To default

The first and default entry must be:

All Fixtures

This is the most sensible default because when browsing an effect, the first thing the operator usually wants to know is:

“What does this look like on everything?”

After that, the list should contain:

saved named groups
individual fixtures
any other valid targets previously defined

Examples:

All Fixtures
Left Wash Group
Right Wash Group
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7
F8

This list is populated from previously defined targets.

If no valid targets exist yet, Apply To should be empty or disabled.

3.7 Bottom action buttons

The final bottom row of the left pane contains:

Save Profile
Save As
Delete Profile

This is a strong final choice.

Save Profile

Saves the current profile under its existing name.

Use when:

editing an already loaded profile
updating assignments
refining an existing setup
Save As

Creates a new named profile from the current current configuration.

Use when:

making a variation
copying a base profile and changing a few assignments
building event-specific or venue-specific alternatives
Delete Profile

Deletes the currently selected profile.

This belongs here because profiles are first-class objects in the final design.

There are no action buttons on the right pane in the final layout.

4. Right pane: layout preview

The right side is the stage preview and fixture manipulation canvas.

Its purpose is to show:

fixture positions
fixture labels
beam direction
live effect color and animation preview
actual stage relationships at a glance

The right pane has a black background because that makes color beams easy to see and avoids visual clutter.

4.1 Current default rig layout

The current small-rig default layout contains eight fixtures:

F1 = lower left
F2 = upper left
F3 = top left
F4 = top mid-left
F5 = top mid-right
F6 = top right
F7 = upper right
F8 = lower right

This numbering was intentionally corrected in the final layout.

The four top fixtures point downward.

The two left fixtures face left.

The two right fixtures face right.

This matches your current real-world small setup:

two color wash heads on the left wall side
two color wash heads on the right wall side
four top-mounted lights centered above the play area
future possibility that one top slot may later become a beacon or other special fixture
4.2 Right pane instruction text

At the bottom of the right pane is a short instruction strip explaining interaction.

The final instruction text is essentially:

left click fixture to rotate
hold left click to drag
right click for options

This is important because the right pane is interactive and not purely static.

4.3 Layout interaction model
Left click

Rotates the selected fixture.

Hold left click and drag

Moves the fixture to a new location on the layout canvas.

Right click

Opens a context menu or options menu for that fixture.

That context menu may later include:

rename fixture
change fixture type
delete fixture
enable/disable fixture
assign DMX role
assign fixture group membership

For v1, the most important interactions are drag and rotate.

4.4 Direction model

Fixtures should rotate in a limited set of directions rather than full free-angle rotation.

Eight positions is the right approach for v1:

up
up-right
right
down-right
down
down-left
left
up-left

That is simple enough for touch and strong enough for visual layout work.

4.5 Fixture labels

Every fixture on the layout preview should be visibly labeled.

This is essential for:

target creation
documentation
consistency with Apply To
quick operator understanding

Without visible labels, the layout is visually attractive but operationally vague.

With labels, it becomes useful.

4.6 Future fixture expansion

Even though the current small rig is eight fixtures, the visualizer should be designed so fixtures can later be:

added
removed
changed in type

That means the right pane should not be hardcoded forever to only the current eight-light arrangement.

However, the default v1 profile should open with your current eight-fixture layout because that is the real hardware baseline.

5. Targets

Targets are how effects are directed.

A target is a saved destination definition for assignment. It may represent:

one fixture
several fixtures
a named reusable group

This is a key concept because the visualizer does not want to force the user to assign everything by raw fixture number every time.

Examples of useful targets for the current layout:

All Fixtures
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7
F8
Left Wash Group
Right Wash Group
Top Fixtures
Top Left Pair
Top Right Pair

Targets should be defined in the Targets manager and then automatically become available in Apply To.

That makes assignment easy and repeatable.

6. Profiles

Profiles are the central saved object in the new system.

A profile is the full saved mapping for one game under one named configuration.

A profile stores, at minimum:

game name
profile name
element-to-effect assignments
element-to-target assignments
references to target definitions or fixture layout IDs
optionally, layout state if profile-specific layouts are allowed

For example, a Surround game might have:

Profile: Default Small Rig

Gameplay → Slow Blue Sweep → All Fixtures
Bonus → Orange Flash → Top Fixtures
Danger → Red Glitter → All Fixtures
Overlay 1 → Beacon Pulse → Beacon
Overlay 2 → Warm Dim → Left Wash Group

Another profile for the same game might instead use:

more restrained color choices
only the top fixtures for danger
different overlay behavior for a church or kids event

That is why profiles matter. They separate the game logic from the lighting flavor.

7. Effects

Effects are reusable visual presets.

They are not tied to one game. They are selected from a library and then assigned to elements inside a profile.

An effect should define things like:

animation style
color behavior
speed
dimmer behavior
strobe or pulse rules if applicable
fixture rendering behavior in preview
DMX playback instructions at runtime

The effect list may be long, which is why:

it needs a proper labeled section
it needs a wide scrollbar
it should preview by hover

Effects are chosen visually, not by memorizing names alone.

8. Console role vs game role

This is one of the most important architectural parts of the system.

Console role

The console is the lighting traffic controller.

The console:

owns game selection
owns profile loading
owns countdown
knows when a game starts
knows when a game ends
owns scoreboard and winner presentation
owns the DMX service
owns effect execution
owns the active layout and profile context

The console should remain the single place where DMX commands are actually applied.

That keeps all lighting control centralized.

Game role

The games should not directly decide which raw theme or DMX scene to play.

Instead, games should report only the internal states the console cannot infer on its own.

Those include your agreed game elements:

Gameplay
Bonus
Danger
Special
Randomizer
Overlay 1–4 when needed

In other words:

the game knows what is happening
the console decides how that should look

That is the clean split.

9. Runtime interaction between games, console, and profiles

At runtime, the interaction model should be:

Console selects a game.
Console loads a profile for that game.
That profile defines which effect belongs to each element.
The game starts.
Console already knows the game started because it launched it.
During play, the game reports internal visual events to the console.
Console resolves those events using the loaded profile.
Console sends the chosen effect to the DMX service using the current targets and layout.
When the game ends and returns score data, the console takes over again for results and scoreboard handling.

This means the profile becomes the translation layer between:

game semantics
actual lighting output
10. Console-owned vs game-owned visual states
Console-owned

These are already known by the host and do not need to be sent by the game:

idle / attract
check-in
countdown
game start
game end
scoreboard
winner / celebration

The current console already handles countdown and scoreboard timing directly.

Game-owned

These are the internal runtime buckets the game should send:

Gameplay
Bonus
Danger
Special
Randomizer
Overlay 1–4 as needed

This keeps the interface stable across current and future games.

11. Overlays

Overlays were added because of your dimmer pack and beacon use case.

They are different from the base game elements.

A base state like Gameplay or Danger replaces the current active game look.

An overlay like Overlay 1 or Overlay 2 may run on top of the current look without replacing it.

That means:

Gameplay can remain active on the main fixtures
Overlay 1 can briefly turn on the beacon
Overlay 2 can pulse a dimmer channel
Overlay 3 can bring up a dumb light
Overlay 4 can control another utility lamp

This is the right architecture for your rig.

12. How the final visualizer replaces the current editor

The current dmx_editor.py is doing too much:

scene editing
scene library management
trigger mapping
fixture role definitions
button assignments
advanced transitions
safety configuration
import/export
runtime testing

The visualizer replaces that with a much narrower workflow:

pick game
pick profile
pick element
browse effect
apply to target
save

That is a much smaller blast radius.

13. Replacing the current editor in v26.7.0

From the uploaded project, the console currently opens the editor through:

open_dmx_editor()
import: from dmx_editor import DMXLightingEditor

and passes these arguments into the editor:

parent
dmx_service
falcon_service
profiles
scenes_file
saved_colors_file
on_close_callback
on_reconfigure_callback
on_scene_applied_callback
game_list
current_game
current_scene_name

This is good news.

That integration point is small.

Best low-risk replacement strategy

Do not immediately rewrite the console side to speak a brand-new API.

Instead, replace the current editor behind the same entry point.

Option A: keep the module/class names the same

Keep:

file name: dmx_editor.py
class name: DMXLightingEditor

but change the UI and data behavior so the user sees the new Visualizer instead of the old editor.

This is the safest path because the console import and constructor call do not need to change.

Internally, the window title and labels can say Visualizer, while the compatibility layer still uses the old import/class names.

That means open_dmx_editor() in the host can stay exactly where it is for now.

Option B: create a new module and thin wrapper

Create:

dmx_visualizer.py
class DMXVisualizer

Then keep a tiny compatibility wrapper inside dmx_editor.py that simply imports and exposes the new class under the old name.

That also minimizes host changes.

14. Reusing existing host arguments for minimal console changes

This is one of the strongest parts of the current setup.

You can reuse most of the host arguments exactly as they are.

parent

Still needed. The visualizer remains a Tkinter child/top-level window.

dmx_service

Still needed. Live preview and test output still require direct DMX access.

falcon_service

Likely still useful if any preview or integration needs Falcon-linked fixture information.

profiles

Currently used for DMX fixture profiles. That can continue unchanged for hardware-level profile data.

scenes_file

This is the most important argument to rethink carefully.

Right now this points to dmx_scenes.json.

For minimal host changes, you have two realistic choices:

Choice 1: keep using dmx_scenes.json

The visualizer stores its new profile-oriented data in the same file, or in a backward-compatible subset.

This is lowest-friction but can get messy because the old file is scene-oriented, not profile-oriented.

Choice 2: keep the argument name, change what file it points to

The host can still pass scenes_file=..., but now that file can be something like:

dmx_visualizer_profiles.json

The argument name stays the same for compatibility, even if the file meaning changes.

That is probably the cleaner long-term choice.

saved_colors_file

Still reusable if the new visualizer keeps a saved color/effect palette concept.

on_close_callback

Still needed. When the visualizer closes, the console should reload data and refresh its DMX UI.

on_reconfigure_callback

Still useful. The user may still need to open DMX hardware configuration from the visualizer.

on_scene_applied_callback

This should be kept for compatibility, but semantically it becomes:

profile assignment updated
visualizer applied preview/assignment
runtime scene/effect data changed

The callback name can stay the same even if its meaning broadens.

game_list

Absolutely still needed.

current_game

Absolutely still needed.

current_scene_name

This can be reinterpreted as the current active console DMX state if useful, or simply ignored if the new visualizer does not need it immediately.

15. How to phase out the existing header.py

I did not find a literal header.py file in the uploaded project, so I cannot document that file specifically by code inspection.

So this section is based on your description that header.py is part of the older workflow being phased out.

Best replacement philosophy

Do not try to preserve old UI behavior if it belongs to a workflow you are intentionally retiring.

Instead, preserve only:

the data contracts the host already expects
the callbacks the host already calls
the minimal argument surface between host and visualizer

If header.py was acting as a front-end configuration layer, the new visualizer should become that front-end.

If header.py was storing named mappings or element selections, that responsibility should move into the visualizer profile system.

Recommended migration strategy

Replace header.py in stages:

Stage 1

Keep host call flow unchanged.
Swap old header/editor entry point to new visualizer window.

Stage 2

Move stored mapping data into profile files.

Stage 3

Add a compatibility reader so old header-driven assignments can still be loaded and converted.

Stage 4

Remove old header-specific logic after the new profile system is stable.

The key point is that the visualizer becomes the new single source of truth for game visual assignments.

16. Suggested data model for the visualizer

A clean profile file should probably be profile-oriented, not scene-oriented.

A profile entry could look conceptually like this:

{
  "game": "Surround",
  "profile_name": "Default Small Rig",
  "layout_id": "small_rig_8_fixture",
  "assignments": {
    "Gameplay": {
      "effect": "Slow Blue Sweep",
      "apply_to": "All Fixtures"
    },
    "Bonus": {
      "effect": "Orange Flash",
      "apply_to": "Top Fixtures"
    },
    "Danger": {
      "effect": "Red Glitter",
      "apply_to": "All Fixtures"
    },
    "Overlay 1": {
      "effect": "Beacon Pulse",
      "apply_to": "Beacon"
    }
  }
}

Targets should be stored separately or inside a layout definition.

A layout definition might look like:

{
  "layout_id": "small_rig_8_fixture",
  "fixtures": [
    {"id": "F1", "type": "wash", "x": 100, "y": 500, "direction": "left"},
    {"id": "F2", "type": "wash", "x": 100, "y": 380, "direction": "left"},
    {"id": "F3", "type": "top",  "x": 280, "y": 120, "direction": "down"},
    {"id": "F4", "type": "top",  "x": 390, "y": 120, "direction": "down"},
    {"id": "F5", "type": "top",  "x": 500, "y": 120, "direction": "down"},
    {"id": "F6", "type": "top",  "x": 610, "y": 120, "direction": "down"},
    {"id": "F7", "type": "wash", "x": 820, "y": 380, "direction": "right"},
    {"id": "F8", "type": "wash", "x": 820, "y": 500, "direction": "right"}
  ],
  "targets": {
    "All Fixtures": ["F1","F2","F3","F4","F5","F6","F7","F8"],
    "Left Wash Group": ["F1","F2"],
    "Right Wash Group": ["F7","F8"],
    "Top Fixtures": ["F3","F4","F5","F6"]
  }
}

That is the kind of structure that fits the visualizer better than the current all-purpose scene file.

17. How the visualizer should interact with the existing console runtime
Current console capabilities already in place

From the uploaded code, the console already:

knows the selected game
handles countdown
handles gameplay start
handles game completion
builds scoreboard payloads
shows scoreboard and results
creates a host API object for games
already uses DMX fixed scenes like GAMEPLAY and SCORE in some places

That means you do not need to invent a whole new host architecture.

Best integration pattern

The visualizer should initially plug into the existing console like this:

visualizer saves profile data
console loads profile data for current game
console already owns start/countdown/results
games continue using ConsoleHostAPI
when games need lighting state changes, they report simple event names to console
console looks up the current game profile
console resolves event → effect → target
console applies the corresponding DMX output

That is a clean evolution of what is already there.

18. Minimal ConsoleHostAPI changes

The existing ConsoleHostAPI already exposes DMX-related methods such as:

dmx_apply_scene
dmx_set_color
dmx_set_fixture_color
dmx_blackout
dmx_set_strobe
dmx_set_brightness

That is useful for backward compatibility, but for the new visualizer architecture, games should not be calling raw DMX scene names directly.

Instead, the best long-term addition would be a very small event-style API, for example:

visual_event("Gameplay")
visual_event("Bonus")
visual_event("Danger")
visual_event("Special")
visual_event("Randomizer")
visual_event("Overlay 1", action="on")
visual_event("Overlay 1", action="off")

That method can be added to ConsoleHostAPI later without breaking the current system.

Phase 1 does not require ripping out the old DMX methods. It only requires adding a cleaner path forward.

19. Recommended phased rollout
Phase 1: UI replacement

Replace the current editor UI with the final visualizer layout.

Goals:

keep host integration surface the same
get the visualizer window working
get profiles, targets, and layout preview functional
preserve close/reload callbacks
Phase 2: Data replacement

Move from scene-heavy editing to profile-heavy editing.

Goals:

save and load profiles
manage targets
manage layout definitions
preserve effect library
Phase 3: Runtime event mapping

Have games report gameplay elements to the console, and have the console resolve those through the active profile.

Goals:

profile-driven runtime lighting
cleaner game/console split
overlays working independently
Phase 4: Retire old scene-only assumptions

Once the visualizer proves stable, remove or reduce the old editor-only scene model where it no longer fits.

20. Why this final visualizer is the right design

This final design works because it fixes the biggest problem of the previous editor: too much scope in one place.

The final visualizer:

is visually clean
is touchscreen-friendly
is organized by game and profile
uses reusable targets
uses a live layout preview
keeps the console in charge of actual runtime DMX
lets games report only meaningful visual states
supports your current 8-fixture small rig cleanly
leaves room for more fixtures later
avoids giant recoding in the host by reusing the existing editor entry point and callbacks

Most importantly, it gives you a tool that matches the actual project:
an LED game console with game-aware lighting profiles, not a general-purpose theatrical programming desk.

21. Recommended final summary

The new visualizer should become the primary DMX configuration interface for Pixel Challenge.

It should replace the current editor workflow with a simpler profile-based system centered on:

Game
Profile
Targets
Element
Effect
Apply To
Layout Preview

The host should remain the runtime authority.

The games should report semantic visual states.

The visualizer should define how those states look.

The DMX service should continue to execute the actual output.

That is the cleanest path forward with the least disruption to v26.7.0.